.TH SUPPORTUTILS-SCRUB 8 "18 Apr 2026" "supportutils-scrub 1.5" "Support Utilities Manual"
.SH NAME
supportutils-scrub \- Obfuscate sensitive data from SUSE supportconfig tarballs and network packet captures
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B supportutils-scrub
\fITARGET\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.br
.B supportutils-scrub
\fIARCHIVE1.txz\fR \fIARCHIVE2.txz\fR [\fIARCHIVE3.txz\fR ...] [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.br
.B cat
\fIlogfile\fR |
.B supportutils-scrub
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.br
.B supportutils-scrub
\fB\-\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.br
.B supportutils-scrub
\fB\-\-rewrite\-pcap\fR \fB\-\-mappings\fR \fIFILE\fR \fB\-\-pcap\-in\fR \fIFILES\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.br
.B supportutils-scrub
\fImappings.json.enc\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBsupportutils-scrub\fR is a utility designed to sanitize and remove sensitive or unwanted data from SUSE supportconfig tarballs, directories, plain log files, and network packet captures. This tool assists users and organizations in aligning with data protection policies, privacy requirements, and GDPR compliance standards.

The tool supports the following input modes:

.TP
.B Archive mode (single)
Processes a single \fI.txz\fR or \fI.tgz\fR supportconfig tarball. An obfuscated copy is written as \fI*_scrubbed.txz\fR alongside the original.

.TP
.B Archive mode (multi)
Processes two or more archives in a single run. Mappings are automatically chained: any IP address, hostname, domain, or username seen in the first archive is given the same fake value in all subsequent archives. This is the recommended way to handle HA clusters (e.g., node1 + node2 + crm_report).

.TP
.B Folder mode
Processes any directory. A copy is created at \fI{dir}_scrubbed/\fR and files are scrubbed in-place inside that copy. No repacking is performed. If the directory looks like a supportconfig collection (contains \fIbasic\-environment.txt\fR), the full pre-scan is performed automatically (domains, hostnames, usernames, serials).
.RS
When \fB\-\-quiet\fR is used, standard output prints exactly one line: the absolute path of the scrubbed output directory. The directory name follows the convention \fI{scrubbed_input_name}_scrubbed\fR, where hostnames in the folder name are replaced with their obfuscated values. The obfuscation summary and warnings are printed to standard error. This interface is intended for programmatic callers such as \fBsupportconfig\fR(8).
.RE

.TP
.B Single file mode
Processes a plain text file (not a tarball). The scrubbed output is written to \fI{file}_scrubbed\fR.

.TP
.B Stdin/pipe mode
Reads from standard input and writes the scrubbed text to standard output. Header and summary are sent to standard error. Activated automatically when no path is given and stdin is not a terminal, or when \fB\-\fR is passed as the path.

.TP
.B PCAP mode
Rewrites packet capture files using the same subnet-aware mappings from supportconfig obfuscation, ensuring consistency between log files and network traces.

All obfuscations are performed consistently, ensuring that sensitive information such as IP addresses, domain names, usernames, hostnames, IPv6 addresses, and MAC addresses are replaced uniformly. The obfuscation mappings are saved in \fI/var/tmp/obfuscation_mappings_*.json\fR and can be reused to maintain consistency across separate runs.

.SH FEATURES
.IP \(bu 2
\fBMultiple input modes:\fR Archives, folders, plain files, stdin/pipe, multi-archive.
.IP \(bu 2
\fBSubnet-Aware IP Mapping:\fR Maps whole IPv4 subnets to fake subnets while preserving host offsets (e.g., gateway .1 remains .1 in the mapped subnet).
.IP \(bu 2
\fBAutomatic entity detection:\fR In pipe/file/stdin modes the tool pre-scans the text to auto-detect usernames (PAM log patterns, logname= fields), hostnames (NFS server lines, RFC\~5424 syslog), and domains (FQDN extraction with TLD validation).
.IP \(bu 2
\fBEmail address obfuscation:\fR Detects and replaces email addresses consistently. Systemd template units (e.g., user@1000.service) and vendor/upstream addresses are preserved.
.IP \(bu 2
\fBPassword value obfuscation:\fR Replaces password values in configuration lines (e.g., password=secret) while preserving the key prefix. Values already redacted by supportconfig are skipped.
.IP \(bu 2
\fBConsistent multi-archive obfuscation:\fR Shared mappings across all archives in one run.
.IP \(bu 2
\fBtcprewrite Integration:\fR Exports mappings compatible with tcprewrite for pcap file obfuscation.
.IP \(bu 2
\fBSafe by Default:\fR Original files are never modified; obfuscated versions are created separately.

.SH OPTIONS
.SS General Options
.TP
\fB\-\-config\fR \fIPATH\fR
Specify the path to the configuration file. Defaults to \fI/etc/supportutils-scrub/supportutils-scrub.conf\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-verbose\fR
Enable verbose output with more detailed logging information.
.TP
\fB\-\-mappings\fR \fIFILE\fR
Load an existing obfuscation mapping file before processing. Accepts both plain \fI*.json\fR and encrypted \fI*.json.enc\fR files — prompts for the passphrase automatically when the file is encrypted. Ensures that any previously assigned fake values are reused for consistency.
.TP
\fB\-\-secure\-tmp\fR
Extract archives to \fI/dev/shm\fR (tmpfs) to prevent sensitive data from touching persistent storage during processing. Falls back to \fI/var/tmp\fR with a warning if \fI/dev/shm\fR is not available. Guaranteed cleanup via try/finally even if the process is interrupted. Can also be enabled with \fIsecure_tmp = yes\fR in the configuration file.
.TP
\fB\-\-encrypt\-mappings\fR
Encrypt the obfuscation mapping file with a user-supplied passphrase using AES-128 (Fernet). The encrypted file is saved with a \fI.enc\fR extension. Requires the Python \fBcryptography\fR package (\fBpip install cryptography\fR). Can also be enabled with \fIencrypt_mappings = yes\fR in the configuration file. Mutually exclusive with \fB\-\-no\-mappings\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-no\-mappings\fR
Do not write a mapping file after processing. Obfuscation mappings will not be reusable across runs. Use this when the mapping file itself is considered a security risk.
.TP
\fB\-\-decrypt\-mappings\fR \fIFILE\fR
Decrypt and print the contents of an encrypted mapping file (\fI*.json.enc\fR) to standard output, then exit. Prompts for the passphrase interactively. Passing a \fI*.json.enc\fR file as a positional argument is equivalent and triggers decrypt mode automatically.

.SS Obfuscation Options
.TP
\fB\-\-verify\fR
After scrubbing, perform a multi-layer verification scan of the output. Checks include: (1) mapping-based — known real values from the obfuscation mapping; (2) IP allowlist — every IPv4 must be in a known-safe range (fake pools, loopback, multicast); (3) MAC allowlist — every MAC must use the fake OUI prefix; (4) pattern scan — detects email addresses, private keys, certificates, API tokens, JWT tokens, passwords, LDAP DNs, and Kerberos principals independent of the mapping; (5) identity check (folder mode) — extracts hostname, IPs, MACs, DNS servers, serials, and UUIDs from the original supportconfig and verifies none survive in the scrubbed output. Prints a list of findings if any are detected. Exits with code 3 if sensitive data remains; exits 0 if clean.
.TP
\fB\-\-report\fR
Write a JSON report alongside the mapping file. Includes the coverage report (which files contained each data category) and, when \fB\-\-verify\fR is used, the full list of verification findings. Useful for compliance evidence and auditing.
.TP
\fB\-\-report\-file\fR \fIFILE\fR
As \fB\-\-report\fR, but write the report to FILE instead of the auto-generated path. Implies \fB\-\-report\fR.
.sp
Note: prior versions accepted \fB\-\-report\fR \fIFILE\fR as a single argument. Since 1.5 the two forms are separate: \fB\-\-report\fR is a plain flag, and an explicit path must go to \fB\-\-report\-file\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-quiet\fR
Suppress the startup banner and per-file listing. In folder mode, standard output prints only the scrubbed output path (one line); the obfuscation summary, warnings, and version info are printed to standard error. This allows callers to capture the output path via command substitution while still displaying progress on the terminal. Useful when called from scripts or \fBsupportconfig\fR(8).
.TP
\fB\-\-stream\fR
Enable streaming stdin mode. Instead of buffering all input before processing, the tool reads the first 500 lines to build entity maps (IP subnets, hostnames, usernames, domains), then scrubs and flushes each subsequent line immediately to stdout.
.sp
Use this flag when piping a live log source that does not produce EOF, such as \fBjournalctl \-f\fR or \fBtail \-f\fR. Without \fB\-\-stream\fR, the tool waits for EOF before producing any output, which blocks indefinitely on a live pipe.
.sp
.B Limitation:
Entities that first appear after the 500-line bootstrap window may not be detected and scrubbed. Use \fB\-\-hostname\fR, \fB\-\-domain\fR, or \fB\-\-username\fR to declare known entities explicitly when using streaming mode.
.TP
\fB\-\-output\-dir\fR \fIDIR\fR
Write the scrubbed archive to DIR instead of alongside the input file.
.TP
\fB\-\-domain\fR \fIDOMAINS\fR
Comma, semicolon, or space-separated list of additional domain names to obfuscate.
.TP
\fB\-\-username\fR \fIUSERNAMES\fR
Comma, semicolon, or space-separated list of additional usernames to obfuscate.
.TP
\fB\-\-hostname\fR \fIHOSTNAMES\fR
Comma, semicolon, or space-separated list of additional hostnames to obfuscate.
.TP
\fB\-\-keywords\fR \fIKEYWORDS\fR
Comma, semicolon, or space-separated list of keywords to obfuscate. Keywords are replaced in both standalone and substring matches.
.TP
\fB\-\-keyword\-file\fR \fIFILE\fR
File containing keywords to obfuscate, one per line.

.SS PCAP Options
.TP
\fB\-\-rewrite\-pcap\fR
Enable PCAP rewriting mode using subnet mappings from the JSON mapping file.
.TP
\fB\-\-pcap\-in\fR \fIFILES\fR
One or more input PCAP files to obfuscate.
.TP
\fB\-\-pcap\-out\-dir\fR \fIDIR\fR
Output directory for obfuscated PCAP files (default: current directory).
.TP
\fB\-\-print\-tcprewrite\fR
Print the exact tcprewrite command being executed (useful for debugging).

.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Single archive
.TP
\fBsupportutils-scrub\fR /var/log/scc_node1.txz
Processes the tarball and writes \fIscc_node1_scrubbed.txz\fR.
.TP
\fBsupportutils-scrub\fR /var/log/scc_node1.txz \-\-domain example.com \-\-verbose
Scrubs the archive, additionally replacing all occurrences of \fIexample.com\fR and its subdomains.

.SS Multiple archives (HA cluster)
.TP
\fBsupportutils-scrub\fR scc_node1.txz scc_node2.txz crm_report.txz
Processes all three archives in one run. Mappings are chained automatically: any IP, hostname, or username seen in node1 receives the same fake value in node2 and the crm_report. A single mapping file is written at the end.

.SS Folder mode
.TP
\fBsupportutils-scrub\fR /var/log/scc_extracted/
Copies the directory to \fI/var/log/scc_extracted_scrubbed/\fR and scrubs all files in-place.

.SS Single file mode
.TP
\fBsupportutils-scrub\fR /var/log/messages
Scrubs the file and writes the result to \fI/var/log/messages_scrubbed\fR.

.SS Stdin/pipe mode
.TP
\fBjournalctl \-u sshd | supportutils-scrub\fR
Scrubs the journal output; scrubbed text goes to stdout, summary to stderr.
.TP
\fBsupportutils-scrub \-\fR < /var/log/messages
Explicitly reads from stdin using the dash argument.
.TP
\fBsupportutils-scrub \-\-domain corp.com < /var/log/auth.log > auth_scrubbed.log\fR
Scrubs auth.log and saves result to a file.

.SS Streaming mode (live pipes)
.TP
\fBjournalctl \-f | supportutils-scrub \-\-stream \-\-no\-mappings\fR
Tail the system journal in real time. Each line is scrubbed and flushed immediately. Without \fB\-\-stream\fR this command would block forever waiting for EOF.
.TP
\fBjournalctl \-f \-u pacemaker | supportutils-scrub \-\-stream \-\-hostname node1,node2 \-\-domain corp.example.com\fR
Live stream of the pacemaker journal with known hostnames and domain declared explicitly so they are scrubbed from the first line.
.TP
\fBjournalctl \-f | supportutils-scrub \-\-stream \-\-mappings /var/tmp/obfuscation_mappings.json | ai\-agent \-\-listen\-stdin\fR
Feed a live scrubbed log stream to a local AI agent. Sensitive data is removed before the agent ever sees any input.

.SS Encrypted mapping file
.TP
\fBsupportutils-scrub\fR /var/log/scc_node1.txz \-\-encrypt\-mappings
Scrubs the archive and saves an AES-encrypted mapping file (\fI*.json.enc\fR). Prompts for a passphrase at startup.
.TP
\fBsupportutils-scrub\fR /var/log/scc_node2.txz \-\-mappings /var/tmp/obfuscation_mappings_20260309_142201.json.enc
Reuses an encrypted mapping file from a prior run to scrub a second archive consistently. Prompts for the passphrase to decrypt the mapping file before processing.
.TP
\fBsupportutils-scrub\fR /var/tmp/obfuscation_mappings_20260309_142201.json.enc
Decrypts and prints the mapping file to stdout. The \fI.json.enc\fR extension is detected automatically.
.TP
\fBsupportutils-scrub\fR \-\-decrypt\-mappings /var/tmp/obfuscation_mappings_20260309_142201.json.enc
Equivalent explicit form using the \fB\-\-decrypt\-mappings\fR flag.

.SS PCAP Obfuscation
.TP
\fBsupportutils-scrub\fR \-\-rewrite\-pcap \-\-mappings /var/tmp/obfuscation_mappings_20260223_120000.json \-\-pcap\-in trace.pcap
Rewrites a single pcap file using existing mappings from a supportconfig obfuscation.
.TP
\fBsupportutils-scrub\fR \-\-rewrite\-pcap \-\-mappings mappings.json \-\-pcap\-in trace1.pcap trace2.pcap \-\-pcap\-out\-dir /var/log/
Rewrites multiple pcap files and saves them to \fI/var/log/\fR.

.SH PCAP REWRITING DETAILS
.SS Subnet-Aware Mapping
.IP \(bu 2
Whole IPv4 subnets are mapped to fake subnets
.IP \(bu 2
Host offsets are preserved (e.g., .1 remains .1, .254 remains .254)
.IP \(bu 2
Most-specific subnet rules are applied first
.IP \(bu 2
Original pcap files are never modified

.SS Requirements
.IP \(bu 2
tcprewrite tool must be installed (package: tcpreplay)
.IP \(bu 2
PCAPs should be captured on specific interfaces (e.g., \-i eth0), not \-i any
.IP \(bu 2
Only IPv4 addresses are rewritten (IPv6 support pending)

.SS Troubleshooting PCAP Rewriting
.TP
.B "No DLT plugin available" error
The PCAP was likely captured with \fBtcpdump \-i any\fR. Re-capture on a specific interface or normalize the link type:
.br
\fBtcprewrite\fR --dlt=enet -i in.pcap -o in-enet.pcap
.TP
.B "Unable to parse as a valid CIDR" error
Ensure the mapping file's subnet entries are valid IPv4 CIDRs.
.TP
.B Empty or unchanged output
If packets don't match any mapped subnets, addresses remain unchanged. Verify with:
.br
\fBtshark\fR -r trace_scrubbed.pcap -c 5 -T fields -e ip.src -e ip.dst | column -t

.SH FILES
.I /etc/supportutils-scrub/supportutils-scrub.conf
.RS
Default configuration file. See
.BR supportutils-scrub.conf (5)
for details.
.RE
.I /var/tmp/obfuscation_mappings_*.json
.RS
JSON files containing obfuscation mappings. These files map real data to obfuscated data and must be kept secure. The subnet section is used for tcprewrite operations.
.RE
.I /var/tmp/obfuscation_mappings_*.json.enc
.RS
AES-encrypted mapping files produced by \fB\-\-encrypt\-mappings\fR. Can be decrypted by passing the file directly to \fBsupportutils-scrub\fR or using \fB\-\-decrypt\-mappings\fR.
.RE
.I /var/tmp/obfuscation_audit_*.json
.RS
Audit log written after every run. Records operator identity, hostname, UTC timestamp, input/output file paths with SHA-256 checksums, CLI arguments used, and the mapping file path. Mode 0600. Provides chain of custody for compliance purposes.
.RE
.I /var/tmp/obfuscation_report_*.json
.RS
Coverage report written by \fB\-\-report\fR. Lists which files in the archive contained each obfuscated data category.
.RE

.SH EXIT STATUS
These exit codes form the stable integration contract. Callers must only test for these values.
.TP
.B 0
Success. All files scrubbed without error.
.TP
.B 1
Fatal error. Input not found, permission denied, or unrecoverable failure. Output must not be trusted.
.TP
.B 2
Completed with warnings. Some files were skipped or non-critical errors occurred. Treat the same as 0 — output is valid.
.TP
.B 3
Verify failed. \fB\-\-verify\fR detected remaining sensitive data in the scrubbed output. Scrubbing is complete but residual data was found.

.SH SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS
.IP \(bu 2
\fBNEVER\fR share the mapping file with SUSE Support or any third party. It contains the translation between obfuscated and real data.
.IP \(bu 2
The obfuscation process is the customer's responsibility. Always review the obfuscated output before sharing.
.IP \(bu 2
Keywords are replaced even within words (substring matching) for thorough obfuscation.
.IP \(bu 2
Use \fB\-\-encrypt\-mappings\fR to protect the mapping file at rest. Without encryption, the mapping file contains all real values as keys and can be used to fully reverse the obfuscation.
.IP \(bu 2
Use \fB\-\-secure\-tmp\fR on systems where disk forensics are a concern. Extraction to \fI/dev/shm\fR ensures sensitive data stays in RAM only.
.IP \(bu 2
Use \fB\-\-no\-mappings\fR when a one-shot obfuscation is sufficient and the mapping file must not exist on disk.
.IP \(bu 2
An audit log is written automatically to \fI/var/tmp/obfuscation_audit_*.json\fR after every run. It records operator, hostname, UTC timestamp, SHA-256 checksums of input and output files, and CLI arguments. Never delete this file before sharing the scrubbed archive — it is your chain of custody.
.IP \(bu 2
All sensitive files (\fI*.json\fR, \fI*.json.enc\fR, \fI*_audit_*.json\fR) are written with mode \fB0600\fR.

.SH INTEGRATION WITH SUPPORTCONFIG(8)
This section describes the stable interface for tools and scripts that call \fBsupportutils-scrub\fR programmatically. \fBsupportconfig\fR(8) may invoke \fBsupportutils-scrub\fR after collecting its dataset when a scrub option is passed; the contract below is the one \fBsupportconfig\fR relies on and is considered stable across minor versions.

.SS Calling supportconfig with automatic scrubbing
Pass \fB\-j\fR to \fBsupportconfig\fR(8) and it invokes \fBsupportutils-scrub\fR automatically after collection.
The scrubbed folder path is printed to stdout; everything else goes to stderr.
.sp
.nf
supportconfig -j
.fi
.sp
To add scrub options without changing the \fBsupportconfig\fR call, set \fBSUPPORTUTILS_SCRUB_OPTS\fR before running:
.sp
.nf
export SUPPORTUTILS_SCRUB_OPTS="--verify --encrypt-mappings"
supportconfig -j
.fi
.sp
Common values for \fBSUPPORTUTILS_SCRUB_OPTS\fR:
.TP
\fB\-\-verify\fR
Re-scan the scrubbed output for residual sensitive data after scrubbing. Exit code 3 if leaks are found.
.TP
\fB\-\-encrypt-mappings\fR
Encrypt the mapping file with a passphrase so the real-to-fake translation cannot be read without it.
.TP
\fB\-\-keywords "token1,token2"\fR
Add site-specific strings to obfuscate (project names, internal hostnames not in DNS, etc.).
.TP
\fB\-\-no-mappings\fR
Do not write a mapping file at all. Use when the mapping file itself must not exist on disk.
.sp
If \fBsupportconfig \-j\fR is not available, call \fBsupportutils-scrub\fR directly on the collected directory:
.sp
.nf
supportutils-scrub --quiet /var/log/scc_hostname_250814_1549
.fi
.sp
With \fB\-\-quiet\fR the only thing written to stdout is the absolute path of the scrubbed output directory.
Hostnames in the directory name are replaced, so \fIscc_hostname_250814_1549\fR becomes
\fIscc_hostname_1_250814_1549_scrubbed\fR. Exit codes: 0 or 2 = success, 1 = failure, 3 = verify found leaks.

.SS Output path convention
The scrubbed directory is always named \fI{input_name}_scrubbed\fR alongside the input.
Any hostname embedded in the input name is replaced with its obfuscated value.
The \fI_scrubbed\fR suffix is stable across versions.

.SS Exit codes for callers
.TP
.B 0 or 2
Success. Use the path returned on stdout.
.TP
.B 3
\fB\-\-verify\fR found residual data. Output exists but may be incomplete; warn the operator.
.TP
.B 1
Fatal error. Do not use the output.

.SH DISCLAIMER
supportutils-scrub is a best-effort obfuscation tool. It does not guarantee
that all sensitive data has been removed from the output. The operator is
responsible for reviewing the scrubbed output before sharing it with any
third party. Use \fB\-\-verify\fR to perform an automated post-scrub scan,
but note that automated verification cannot detect all forms of sensitive data.
SUSE accepts no liability for data disclosed in scrubbed archives.
.SH AUTHOR
Ronald Pina <ronald.pina@suse.com>
.SH COPYRIGHT
This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; version 2 of the License.
.PP
This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.
.PP
You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program; if not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR supportutils-scrub.conf (5),
.BR supportconfig (8),
.BR tcprewrite (1),
.BR tcpreplay (1)
